## Command Syntax 
- **command [options] [arguments]**
- Example ***ls -l /home***
- Command - tells Linux what action to perrform.
   - pwd, date, whoami
- Options - changes how a command behaves
   - *-*shorter version
   -  *--*longer version
   -  ***ls -l*** or ***ls --help***
- Arguments - specify the file, directory, or value the command works on.
   -  ***ls -l /etc*** 

## Files and Directories Permissions 
- UNIX and Linux are a multi-user system.
- Every file and directory in your account can be protectec from or made accessible by changing the its access permissions.
- Every user has responsibility for controlling access to their files.
  
- Understanding Linux Permissions
   - There are three types of permissions in Linux.
   -  Read	**r**	View file contents
   -  Write	**w**	Modify file
   -  Execute	**x**	Run file/program
- Permission Groups
   - Permission are assigned to three categories of users.
   - User/Owner	**u**	File owner
   - Group	**g**	Users in same group
   - Others	**o**	Everyone else
 
## Chmod
- Chmod - Change Mode - It is used to change permissions of files and directories.
- Example
  - ***chmod u+x script.sh*** - Adds execute permission to owner.
  - ***chmod g-w file.txt*** - Removes write permission from group.
  - ***chmod o=r file.txt*** - Others get only read permission.
  - ***chmod u+rwx,g+rx,o-r file.txt*** 
    - Adds read, write and execute permissions to owner
    - Adds read and execute permission to group
    - Removes read permission to others.
- Calculating Permission Numbers
    - | Permission | Value       |
      | ---------- | ---------   |
      | `rwx`      | 7 = (4+2+1) |
      | `rw-`      | 6 =  (4+2)  |
      | `r-x`      | 5 =  (4+1)  |
      | `r--`      | 4           |
      | `---`      | 0           |

- Common Permission Examples
    - | Command          | Meaning                                |
      | ---------------- | -------------------------------------- |
      | `chmod 777 file` | Everyone gets full permissions         |
      | `chmod 755 file` | Owner full access, others read/execute |
      | `chmod 644 file` | Owner read/write, others read only     |
      | `chmod 700 file` | Only owner has access                  |

## Linux File Ownership Commands (chown and chgrp)
- In Linux, every file and directory belongs to: A user (owner), A group.
  
- Understanding File Ownership
   - Use the following command to view ownership details:
   - ***ls -l***
   - ***-rw-r--r-- 1 teja developers 1200 May 20 file.txt***
      - User teja owns the file
      - Group developers is associated with the file
### What is chown?
- chown stands for: Change Owner
- It changes: File owner, File group and Both owner and group.
- Syntax of chown: ***chown [options] owner filename***
   - ***chown user1 file.txt*** - Changes ownership of file.txt to user1.
- Changing Owner and Group Together Syntax: ***chown owner:group filename***
   - ***chown teja:developers file.txt*** - changes owner to teja and group to developers.
- Changing Only Group Using chown: ***chown :group filename***
   - ***chown :developers file.txt***
- Recursive Ownership Change
   - Use -R for recursive changes.
   - ***chown -R teja:developers project/***
   - Changes ownership for: Directory, All files, All subdirectories.
- Using Reference File
   - ***chown --reference=file1 file2*** - Copies ownership of file1 to file2. 

### What is chgrp?
- chgrp stands for: change group
- It changes only the group ownership of files/directories.
- Syntax of chgrp: ***chgrp group_name filename***
   - ***chgrp developers file.txt*** - Changes group ownership to developers.
- Recursive Group Change
   - ***chgrp -R developers project/*** -
 
## Access Control Lists (ACL)
- Linux permissions normally allow access control for: Owner, Group, Others.
- But sometimes this is not enough.
- Example: You want to give a specific user access to a file without changing ownership or group permissions.
- This is where Access Control Lists (ACLs) are used.

- ACL allows administrators to:
   - Give permissions to specific users
   - Give permissions to multiple groups
   - Set default permissions for directories
   - without changing: file owner, primary group.

- ACL Commands
   - ***getfacl*** -	View ACL permissions
   - ***setfacl*** - Set ACL permissions
- Viewing ACL Permissions Syntax 
   - ***getfacl filename***
- Setting ACL Permissions Syntax
   - ***setfacl [options] permissions filename***
- Giving User Permission
   - ***setfacl -m u:john:rw file.txt***
   - ***-m***	Modify ACL
   - ***u:john:rw***	Give read and write permission to john
- Giving Group Permissions
   - ***setfacl -m g:developers:rwx project/***
- Remove Specific ACL Entry
   - ***setfacl -x u:john file.txt***
   - Removes ACL for user john.
- Removing All ACL Entries
   - ***setfacl -b file.txt***
   - ***-b*** removes all ACLs.

## Input Output Redirects
- **Output Redirection (>)**
   - Saves command output to a file.
   - ***ls > files.txt***
   - Creates files.txt
   - Overwrites existing content

- **Append Output (>>)**
   -  Adds output to existing file.
   -  ***date >> log.txt***
 
- **Input Redirection (<)**
  -  Takes input from a file.
  -  ***wc -l < file.txt***

- **Error Redirection (2>)**
   - Stores errors in a file.
   - ***ls wrongfile 2> error.txt***
 
## tee Command in Linux
- The tee command is used to:
   - Display output on the terminal
   - Save the same output to a file at the same time
   - Syntax -  ***command | tee filename***
- tee command Example
   -  ***ls | tee files.txt***
   - Output shown on screen
   - Output also saved in files.txt
- Append Mode
   - Use -a to append instead of overwrite.
   - ***date | tee -a log.txt***
- Multiple Files
   - ***echo "Hello" | tee file1.txt file2.txt***

## Pipe ( | ) Command in Linux 
- The Pipe (|) is one of the most powerful features in Linux.
   - It Connect multiple commands
   - Use output of one command as input to another command
   - Process data efficiently
 
- Basic Syntax ***command1 | command2***
   - How Pipe Works
   - command1 produces output
   - Pipe (|) sends that output
   - command2 receives it as input
 
## Executing Multiple Commands
- **Using Semicolon (;)**
   - Runs multiple commands one after another.
   - Syntax ***command1 ; command2***
   - Example: ***pwd ; date ; whoami***
   - Execution Flow
   - Show current directory
   - Show date
   - Show logged-in user
   - All commands execute regardless of success or failure.
 
- **Using AND Operator (&&)**
   -  Executes next command only if previous command succeeds.
   - Syntax: ***command1 && command2***
   - Example: ***mkdir test && cd test***
   - If mkdir test succeeds Then cd test executes
   - Failure Example: ***cd invalid && ls***
   - If cd invalid fails, ls will not execute
 
- **Using OR Operator (||)**
   - Executes next command only if previous command fails.
   - Syntax: ***command1 || command2***
   - Example: ***cd project || echo "Directory not found"***
   - If cd project fails, Error message prints.

## Cut Command 
- It extracts selected bytes, characters, or fields (columns) from each line of text.
- Basic Syntax - ***cut [OPTIONS] [FILE]***
- You must use one of these options:
   - ***-b*** → extract bytes
   - ***-c*** → extract characters
   - ***-f*** → extract fields (columns)
- ***cut --version*** - check version
- ***cut -c1 filename*** - List the 1st character in each line
- ***cut -c1,2,4 filename*** - Pick and chose character
- ***cut -c1-3 filename*** - List range of characters
- ***cut -c1-2,6-8 filename*** - List specific range of characters 
- ***cut -b1-3 filename*** - List by byte size
- ***cut -d: -f 6 /etc/passwd*** - Lisy first 6th column separated by :
- ***ls -l | cut -c2-4*** - only prints user permission od a file/dir

## awk Command 
- awk is a pattern‑scanning and processing language used to work with text files, logs, CSVs, and command output.
- It reads input line by line, splits each line into fields (columns), and lets you perform actions on them.
- awk reads text line by line, splits it into fields, and lets you print or process the parts you want.
- Basic Syntax ***awk 'pattern { action }' file***
   - pattern → what to match
   - action → what to do when matched
- Fields - awk automatically splits each line into fields:
   - $1 → first column
   - $2 → second column
   - $0 → entire line
   - ***awk '{print $1}' file.txt*** - print the first column
- Default delimiter - awk splits fields by spaces or tabs unless you change it.
   - To set a delimiter: ***awk -F ":" '{print $1}' /etc/passwd***
- Patterns - You can match lines using text or regex.
   - ***awk '/root/ {print $0}' /etc/passwd*** -  print lines containing "root"
- ***awk --version*** - check version
- ***awk '{print $1}' filename*** - List 1st field from a file
- ***ls -l | awk '{print $1 $3}'*** - List 1st and 3rd fields of ls -l output
- ***ls -l | awk '{print $NF}'*** - Last field of the output
- ***awk '/teja/{print}' file*** - Search for specific word like teja in a file
- ***awk -f '{print $1}' /etc/passwd*** - Output only the 1st filed of /etc/passwd
- ***echo "Hello Tom" | awk '{$2="Adam" ; print $0}'*** - Replace words field words
- ***cat file | awk '{$2="Teja"; print $0}'*** - Replace words fields words
- ***awk 'length($0) > 15' file*** - Get lines that have more than 15 bytes sizes
  ***ls -l | awk '{if($NF == "teja") print $0;}'*** - Get the field name matching teja in /home/user
- ***ls -l | awk '{print NF}'*** - Number of fields.

  ## grep/egrep Command
- grep searches for text patterns inside files or command output.
- egrep is the same as grep -E, meaning it supports extended regular expressions (more powerful patterns).
- Basic Syntax - ***grep [options] Patterns Filename***
- Basic grep Search for a word in a file:
    - ***grep "hello" file.txt***
    - Search is case‑sensitive by default.
- Case‑insensitive search -  ***grep -i "error" logfile.txt***
- Search recursively in folders
   - ***grep -r "main" /home/user/project***
   - grep -r searches for a pattern in the current directory AND every folder inside it.
   - It reads every file, goes into every subfolder, and prints matching lines.
- Search for count of the keyword - ***grep -c keyword file***
- Search for matched keywords and display matched lines and line numbers - ***grep -n keyword file***
- Invert match (show lines NOT containing pattern)
   - ***grep -v success results.txt***
   - Shows all lines except those containing “success”.
- **egrep = grep -E**
   - It supports Extended Regular Expressions (ERE) such as:
   - | (OR), +, ?, {n}
   - ***egrep "cat|dog" animals.txt*** Same as ***grep -E "cat|dog" animals.txt***
